# Cardinal number

A set $A$ is said to be **infinite** if and only if there exists a **proper subset** $B$ of $A$ such that $B \cong A$. A set that is not infinite is said to be **finite**.

It can be proved that a nonempty set $A$ is **finite** if and only if $A$ is numerically equivalent to the set $F_n = {1, 2, 3, \dots ,n}$ for some positive integer $n$. It is easy to show that $\emptyset$ is finite. It can be proved furthermore that, for positive integers $m$ and $n$, $F_m \cong F_n$ if and only if $m = n$. Thus we may associate with each finite set $A$ a unique nonnegative integer $n(A)$, called the number of elements in $A$. If $n(A) = k$, we say that $A$ has **finite cardinal number $k$**. We usually denote a generic finite set $A$ having $k$ elements by such notation as $A = { a_1, a_2, \dots , a_k }$.

Once again, the cardinal number of a finite set is simply the number of elements in that set, in the usual sense. Two finite sets with same number of elements, in the usual sense, have the same cardinal number; two finite sets with different numbers of elements, in the usual sense, have different cardinal numbers.

Why, to begin with, is it difficult to measure the size of an infinite set? The answer lies in a realization of what we actually do when counting the elements of a finite set $S$. Using the set $\mathbb{N}$ as our point of reference, we associate with each element of $S$ a unique positive integer, starting with $1$ and ending with some $n$. We then designate $n$ by a symbol such as $n(S)$ and call it the number of elements in $S$. For a finite set $T$, we might go through the same process and arrive at a positive integer $m$. We then answer the question whether $S$ and $T$ are the same size by asking whether $n$ equals $m$.

The problem, of course, in dealing with infinite sets is that we never exhaust the elements; there is no positive integer $m$ we can associate with such a set. So how can we reasonably compare the size of two such sets? The answer lies in considering how the sizes of finite sets might be compared if no set $\mathbb{N}$ is available. Imagine living in a situation, be it a primitive culture today or perhaps in a prehistoric time, in which systems of naming (possibly any but the smallest) counting numbers do not exist. How could we then determine, for instance, whether we have more pegs or more holes in a Peg-Board? With luck, the most intelligent or creative among us might
think of putting pegs into holes until the supply of one or the other is exhausted. In so doing, we are clearly setting up a **one-to-one** mapping between pegs and holes. Only if both pegs and holes run out simultaneously, could that mapping be **onto** and would we then judge the two sets to be of the same size, that is, numerically equivalent. We would not, at this stage, have in mind any measure of the common size of the two sets (with counting numbers unavailable); rather, we would have only the knowledge that the two sets are the same size.

The genius of Cantor consisted partially in his realization that this **aproach does not depend on exhausting the elements in the set for its effectiveness**. Given any two sets, both infinite, one finite and one infinite, or both finite, we can ask whether they are numerically equivalent, that is, can we discover a **one-to-one correspondence** between them or prove that none exists? This is not to say that the question will be easy to answer in all cases, or that we won't run into surprises and challenges to our intuition once this genie is out of the bottle. One such surprise is the possibility of a one-to-one correspondence between a set $S$ and one of its proper subsets $P$. This is (by our formal definition as well as by intuition) out of the question in the finite case. In that case, as we try to match elements in $P$ with those in $S$, we will clearly run out of elements in $P$, so that our mapping is doomed to fail to be **onto**. This "running out of elements" is precisely what will not happen in the infinite case. Clearly the inclusion mapping $I_P: P \rightarrow S$ is not the desired one-to-one correspondence (never onto when $P$ is a **proper subset** of $S$), but some other mapping may be.

## Reference

1. Ronald P. Morash, *Bridge to abstract math. Mathematical proof and structures* (page 279, 280)